---
layout: pr
date: 2020-02-19
title: "Remove calls to Chain::Lock methods"
pr: 17954
authors: [ryanofsky]
components: ["wallet"]
host: ryanofsky
status: upcoming
commit:
---

## Notes

This PR is one change in a sequence of PRs making the bitcoin wallet code more
asynchronous and independent of node code, so the node can be more robust and
performant, and not get locked up while wallet code is executing. The changes
are also supposed to be architecture improvements, making the wallet/node
interface more high level and less tied to implementation details of the node
and wallet. They also get wallet code closer to being able to work offline or in
different processes without constantly querying the node. Notable PRs making
wallet code more asynchronous are:

[#10286](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/10286) by TheBlueMatt -
changing the wallet to process `BlockConnected`, `BlockDisconnected`, etc
notifications from the node asynchronously, adding
CWallet::m_last_block_processed field

[#15931](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15931) by ariard - changing the
wallet to cache block heights, adding CWallet::m_last_block_processed_height and
CWalletTx::m_confirm.block_height fields, and using cached heights to avoid
needing to call Chain::Lock::getBlockDepth to determine transaction status.

[#17443](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17443) by ariard, pending
review - using cached block heights to avoid needing to call Chain::checkFinalTx
to determine transaction status

[#17954](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17954) by ryanofsky, this pr -
using cached block heights and CWallet::m_last_block_processed in many different
wallet functions to avoid the need to call Chain::Lock make the make the wallet
return internally-consistent information if m_last_block_processed lags behind
the current node tip

[#16426](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/16426) by ariard, pending
review - removing Chain::Lock class altogether, removing a way wallets could
lock up the node unintentially or longer than needed

All interactions between the wallet and node code happen though the
[`interfaces::Chain`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/470664f2b788e2cce9202991d11476a6fef00ef4/src/interfaces/chain.h#L54)
and `interfaces::Chain::Lock` interfaces. Generally the less the wallet needs to
call these methods, the more efficient both the node and the wallet can be. Also
the simpler wallet code can be because it can avoid challenge of having to
reconcile its cached state with latest information returned from the node, when
`CWallet::m_last_block_processed` is behind the node tip.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PRs? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
NACK?](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)
(Don't forget to put your PR review on GitHub.)

2. What happens in the `interfaces::Chain::Lock` chain constructor and
destructor? What is the effect of writing `auto locked_chain =
pwallet->chain().lock();`?

3. What's the difference between calling `interfaces::Chain::getHeight()` and
`CWallet::GetLastBlockHeight()`? When will the values be the same, and when will
they be different?

4. In commit ["wallet: Avoid use of Chain::Lock in
listsinceblock"](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17954/commits/e276b6821430ec2c18aba55137daf98bae770054),
when `listsinceblock` is called with a non-null block hash, how does the change
replacing `locked_chain->getHeight()` prevent `pwallet->GetLastBlockHeight()`
transactions that are older than the specified block from being mistakenly
printed?

5. Trickier: In the same commit, how does the change from
`locked_chain->getBlockHash(last_height)` with `pwallet->GetLastBlockHash()`
result in a more accurate `"lastblock"` value (that won't result in missing
transactions when passed to a subsequent `listsinceblock` call).

6. In the same commit, what is the `coinbaseKey.MakeNewKey(true)` line doing,
and why does the test fail if it is removed?

7. In commit ["wallet: Avoid use of Chain::Lock in
importmulti"](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17954/commits/b91020a919d445dee91e908969ba8f964dd2ca4b),
what was the removed `fRescan = false;` call intended to do? Why is it safe to
remove?

<!-- TODO: uncomment and add meeting log
## Meeting Log
```
```
--->